# Train and deploy ML models in a multicloud environment using Amazon SageMaker

As customers accelerate their migrations to the cloud and transform their business, some find themselves in situations where they have to manage IT operations in a multicloud environment. For example, you might have acquired a company that was already running on a different cloud provider, or you may have a workload that generates value from unique capabilities provided by AWS. Another example is independent software vendors (ISVs) that make their products and services available in different cloud platforms to benefit their end customers. Or an organization may be operating in a Region where a primary cloud provider is not available, and in order to meet the data sovereignty or data residency requirements, they can use a secondary cloud provider.

In this notebook, we demonstrate one of the many options that you have to take advantage of AWS’s broadest and deepest set of AI/ML capabilities in a multicloud environment. We show how you can build and train an ML model in AWS and deploy the model in another platform. We train the model using Amazon SageMaker, store the model artifacts in Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3), and deploy and run the model in Azure. This approach is beneficial if you use AWS services for ML for its most comprehensive set of features, yet you need to run your model in another cloud.

For more details of the approach please read the blog [Train and deploy ML models in a multicloud environment using Amazon SageMaker](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/train-and-deploy-ml-models-in-a-multicloud-environment-using-amazon-sagemaker/)
